adds storage costs to learn segment (#54)
massalabs/docu-dev: docs/learn/architecture/storage-costs.mdx

---
id: storage-costs
sidebar_label: Storage costs
---

# Storage costs

> In the Massa network, the ledger is shared among all nodes, but to prevent the requirement of massive storage capacities like 100TB, a size limit of 1TB has been set. This limit is essential to encourage widespread adoption and enable users to run nodes from their homes. To ensure compliance with this limit, a mechanism has been established that correlates storage space with locked coins.

Reviewer: Same as above: "the ledger is shared among all nodes" is unclear to me.

> In the Massa network, the ledger is shared among all nodes, but to prevent the requirement of massive storage capacities like 100TB, a size limit of 1TB has been set. This limit is essential to encourage widespread adoption and enable users to run nodes from their homes. To ensure compliance with this limit, a mechanism has been established that correlates storage space with locked coins.

Reviewer: You're explainin gthe same thing as above, are,'t you ?

Author: Two different pages -> basic concepts has a few paragraphs to introduce the concept. The page Storage costs goes into details.

For every byte of storage space claimed, whether it's for storing address and balance information, keys in the datastore, bytecode, or other data elements, users are required to lock a corresponding amount of coins. These locked coins act as a commitment and are released when the allocated storage space is released.

To determine the amount of coins needed to lock for each byte of storage, the value of 0.00025 Massa has been chosen. This value ensures that if half of the total coins (250,000,000 Massa) are locked, the storage limit of 1TB will be reached.

> Balances in the ledger are stored as varints, which means their size can vary. To avoid confusion, a fixed size of 8 bytes has been chosen for each balance. Therefore, the initial ledger entry for address and balance incurs a cost of (8 + 32) * 0.00025 = 0.01 Massa. Datastore keys also have variable sizes, but to simplify calculations, a fixed size of 10 bytes is used for determining storage costs.

Reviewer: this senetence is useless: "Balances in the ledger are stored as varints, which means their size can vary"

To calculate the storage cost for a specific address in the ledger, the formula includes the address size, balance constant, bytecode length, and the sum of constants for each datastore key and its corresponding value size. The overall formula is:

> ```address_size + balance_constant + bytecode_length + sum of (datastore_key_constant + datastore_value_size) * 0.00025```

Reviewer: Can't you use a mathematic display instead ?

> It's important to note that the storage costs are always paid by the address that initiates the Application Binary Interface (ABI) call. For example, if the ABI functions "```set_bytecode```" or "```set_bycode_for```" are used, the associated storage costs will be charged to the address making the call.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's important to note that the storage costs are always paid by the address that initiates the Application Binary Interface (ABI) call. For example, if the ABI functions [setBytecode](https://as-sdk.docs.massa.net/functions/setBytecode.html) or [setBycodeOf](https://as-sdk.docs.massa.net/functions/setBytecodeOf.html) are used, the associated storage costs will be charged to the address making the call.
```

## Examples
When creating an address on the blockchain, a minimum of 0.01 Massa (0.00025 * (32 + 8)) needs to be sent alongside the operation that generates the address (e.g., a transfer). This cost covers the creation of the address and its associated balance.

Suppose you want to store your birth date, which is 30 bytes long, in your datastore. In that case, you need to send an operation that creates a key in your datastore using a Smart Contract. This operation incurs a storage cost of at least 0.01 Massa, calculated as 0.00025 * (10 + 30).

> Thus, if you create a new wallet using the Massa Client ```(massa-client)```, you can generate a secret key ```(wallet_generate_secret_key)```) and verify its address using the "```wallet_info``" function. However, until a transfer of at least 0.01 Massa is received to your wallet address, it will not appear in any of blockchain's ledgers.

Reviewer: Unclear. You shoudl simply explain that a wallet without any operation is stored on the blockchain.

> If a transfer of 0.005 Massa is received, the operation will fail. 

Reviewer: Unclear, you should explain that if the amount of transfer on an unexisting address is lower than the amount of massa needed to create the address on the ledger, the operation will be refused

On the other hand, if a transfer of 10 Massa is received, your balance will show only 9.99 Massa available.

In case you wish to delete the entry in your datastore, you will be refunded the storage costs (0.02 Massa).

:::info

> In the case of a refund for storage costs, the address that receives the refund is the one that initiates the ABI call, which may differ from the address that initially paid for the storage.

Reviewer: Which ABI call ?
